Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Peter Linder. He is Distinguished professor
Emeritus in the Department of Economics at the University
of California Davis. And today we're talking about his
book Making Social Spending Work. So, Doctor Linder, welcome
to the show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Well, thank you, Ricardo. A pleasure for me too.
So, just to introduce the topic here, let me
start perhaps with the most basic question just for
people to understand or to have a good idea
of what we're talking about here exactly. So, what,
what is social spending and what counts as social
spending?
In my work, I am concentrating on government spending
on public education, public health, uh, public pension insurance,
public housing, and welfare for the poor. Things like
that. Those are the kinds of spending that are
always defined as social spending by the OECD and
others. I could have added private and charitable spending
on the same things. Um, I don't, I talk
about them a bit in the book, but I
don't emphasize them because the the real controversy. What
people are wondering about is the government spending, so
government spending on public education, public health, and those
other things.
OK, but since uh social spending could be done
through charity or private or or through private entities
or even private people doing it, what are some
of the most common arguments against government social spending?
Uh, TWO arguments that are related. One, it takes
money away from productive people and gives it to
people that are less productive because of poor health
or behavior or whatever. And that's often viewed as
unfair. The second argument is that it's a bad
disincentive for everybody. If you're taxing the productive, subsidizing
the unproductive, people in general will be less productive
and will have less income to share. Those are
the arguments.
Are those arguments supported by the evidence?
Not strongly, um, well, um, the second argument is
the crucial empirical one. Does it really discourage economic
growth by giving people bad incentives? Um, THE argument
for that is not strong, and that's one of
the main things that I argue in the book.
And so I, I'm not sure if you're going
to reply to this question with the counterarguments to
the arguments you mentioned before, but what are the
most common arguments for government social spending?
Um, Growth and equality, that is, it promotes a
people's productivity by investing in them, you know, investing
in their health, their education, their security. And uh
it makes tends to make things more equal, that
because it insures people who needed help in order
to get the extra productivity.
And why is this still an uh an ongoing
debate? Why are people still debating whether government social
spending is good or bad?
It will always be ongoing for the simple reason
that there's a conflict of interest. We know that
this takes money from some people and makes it
available to others. It takes money from people who
don't have bad outcomes, don't need insurance, or are
rich. It gives money to people who it wants
to invest in. That means there will always be
a conflict of self-interest between those who know they're
gonna be paying and not getting so much benefits,
and those who know they're gonna be getting more
benefits. Guaranteed. It will always be an argument.
So now I would like to ask you about
uh the conditions that allow for government social spending
to take off, but perhaps uh just before we
get into that, looking back in history, how old
is this type of social spending?
Different histories for different types. The oldest is simply
relief to the poor. We know they gave some
of that in the Middle Ages, especially to the
poor who are obviously disabled or old widows, something
like that. Uh, THAT goes back to the Middle
Ages, maybe earlier in some settings. Public education is
really only from the early 19th century, so that's
only a couple 100 years old. Yes, uh, paid
for mainly by the state. Uh, YET, it's not
until the 20th century even that social spending is
great at all, as great as, say, 3% of
GDP. So most social spending is extremely recent, even
post-war.
And going back to the question I mentioned before,
are there any particular kinds of conditions that allow
for government social spending to take off, or is
there a minimum, a minimum set of conditions or
not?
Good question. Uh, ESPECIALLY when we look at that
history, right? For most of human history, this never
happened. Now it's happened a lot in the last
100 years. And it's still here. So what were
the conditions that were so recent? Um, I think
the main thing to emphasize is that, uh, political
voice. Has spread to the masses. It was through
most of history is simply the the ruler and
his army, his henchmen, or uh the landed classes
that had the power and so this sort of
thing just didn't happen for millennia. But once you
give voice to the masses, uh, that makes it.
Uh, POSSIBLE for this sort of thing to take
off because there's a, a growing share of society
that wants it. Something else too, on the education
front, which is an extremely important early um type
of social spending. We began to have. An economy
that would reward people for being illiterate and numerate
and more informed. Once there was a lot of
need for information about what's going on in the
world and what's changing. So, in particular, it's the
rise of commerce. Think of since Columbus, uh, and
the rise of commerce all over the world. Now
it becomes the case that almost anybody could gain.
By getting education, um, you don't need to have
some special technology come along. Just as soon as
you have commerce and people trading a lot, the
world will get a big, uh, collective gain from,
um, literacy and numeracy.
And why is it that Northwest Europe historically seems
to have led the way? Why North Northwest Europe
specifically? Yeah.
That's a good question, uh. It. It does have,
it was early in the spread of political voice,
um, for a shorthand we could sort of say
democracy. And that, as I said, is something that
makes uh social spending uh become possible because enough
people will uh stand up and vote for it,
uh, at the expense of taxpayers, uh, including themselves.
That's, I think a main thing, a reason why
Northwest Europe, uh, and it's Northwest Europe also that
had, as I said, for education, that rise of
commerce, the, you know, the sudden need for and
the immediate uses for uh basic education. So I
would say North Europe for those reasons, I have
to say North Europe and soon uh Northern America
too. But basically it's it's it's a European thing,
and to this day, for reasons that are sort
of political, social, Europe is still the center of
of social spending. Really all of Europe, even Eastern
Europe, um, that's the center, that's where it happens.
It's, it is largely a European thing.
Yeah, I can confirm it because I live here,
so.
OK, so,
uh,
earlier you mentioned when I asked you about how
old the government social spending is, you mentioned at
a certain point that, for example, public education started
around 200 years ago. Uh, HOW important is universal
education when it comes to growth and equality, for
example?
Um, THAT'S easy. That's very important. There's There are
high rates of return to all of society and
not just to the child and their parents. From
education. It's always been true. It's just never been
overturned. You keep looking for the day that we
will find a a rising literature saying, you know,
the money spent on education, it's all wasted, and
that's an argument, a hard argument to make, even
just for government money. Uh, EVERYWHERE the returns are
there, and you look at higher education, is the
demand for higher education falling off because people know
that it's not worth it. No, uh, the rates
of return are high, the demand is crushing. It's
so hard, it's so hard to get into the
best schools because everybody is applying. Uh, SO the
Contribution to our productivity. From Uh general education is
enormous, so enormous that really there is no society
in the world that has not. Um, PAID for
most of its. Primary education through taxes and government.
That's universal. Everybody does it. They must have figured
out something.
Uh, AND so, uh, a particular phenomenon that you
point to at a certain point in your book
is that since around 1910, there's been a somewhat
slow shift in social spending toward supporting the powerful
and the elderly at the expense of assisting the
young and the poor. So, um, could you tell
us a little bit about that and is it,
uh, problematic in some way?
Um, IT is clearly happening over this, these last
100 years. As the budget social budget grows, it
becomes more and more, um, spending on the elderly
and less and less obviously redistributive toward the poor.
Giving money toward the poor has dropped as a
share. Uh, YOU could say, well, rising conservatism doesn't
like. Uh, WELFARE spending, that could be, it could
also be that the uh the needs are, um,
not as great. You, the poverty line, the share
of people below the poverty line, always tends to
stay high, but that's because you keep raising the
poverty line, and it may be that the political
process is seeing that, you know, in absolute terms,
the needs are lower. So I think that's maybe
one reason why the welfare spending went down. Education
down and pensions up. Well, that's demography, that's the
the aging of population. We don't have so many
children. And uh we have a a few elderly.
I can, I can name one at least.
Uh, AND another very interesting aspect of government social
spending, you point out in the book is what
you call there the free lunch puzzle because apparently,
uh, As uh um apparently when we have larger
social spending budgets, they do not really seem to
have, uh, uh, any effects in terms of loss
of GDP or loss of skills or work. So,
how does that happen?
Well, let me comment first on the fact that
the evidence seems to look that way and then
let's think about how it happens, which is a
great research question. Uh, THE evidence, uh, really looks
like this. If you have a period in which
the share of GDP being spent on government social
spending is going up. Mhm. It's just it uh
is going or sorry or is at a higher
level. Uh, IT is not the case that that
is like uh. Uh, A setting where the Um,
GDP is dropping, or GDP per person is dropping.
It, it just is not clear, it just does
not happen that way. Now I'm saying that at
first it just with raw correlations, you know, uh,
the fact is, Uh, large social spending is something
that rich countries do. And that makes it hard
for a person who just wants to come up
with a good propaganda argument against it, to say
that it ruins economic growth, uh, and and makes
prosperity impossible. So it's just hard to see it.
Now that's just raw correlation. What's the causation? Does
social spending cause better growth? Does it secretly worsen
growth, but something else made it happen anyway, um.
That's difficult statistically, uh, to show, but I can
give you, and this is the second part of
your question, I can give you not exactly statistical
evidence like from a medical control trial, but I
can give you just good reasons why it should
not have caused much damage to economic growth. Here's
the main reason. Governments are not completely stupid. Uh,
IF something is really dumb and all it does
is worsen economic growth, uh, for the benefit of
some small group, uh, they won't do it. And
if you look at European, uh, especially Northern European,
uh, designs. They they have learned from mistakes. They've
made auto course corrections uh when uh setting up
these programs and expanding them. Um, THE basic answer
is that the way it's done is not stupid.
The theories that it would uh really ruin the
economy are theories about kind of a stupid policy.
Yes, that was a danger, and I'm glad people
were worried about it, but it's not actually happening
much. Uh, YOU can find some examples of waste
in government just as you can in private enterprise,
but as an overall phenomenon, no. Now, let me
tell you some specific ways in which it clearly
helps. First of all, if you let me include
education in the social spending, as others have said,
oh, you should have, you should emphasize that all
along. Well, uh, it's, it makes the case so
easy because education is clearly, public education is clearly
raising GDP. Significantly, a good rate of return. Now,
and even beyond that, there are reasons why uh
other kinds of social spending also help, uh, better
public health, uh, public health is Something that uh
governments. Um, PROMOTE, uh, through public and usually through
public health insurance subsidies. And it makes the world
more productive. Those are 22 quick examples right there.
Uh, I go into others in the book. Uh,
LET me pause there for the moment.
Mhm. No, yes, I was going to ask you
because earlier I asked you about public education specifically,
but there are 2 or 3 more examples of
social spending that I would like to ask you
directly about because together with education. They are the
most evident, I think. When it comes to healthcare,
um, I mean, in terms of universal healthcare specifically,
how old is it historically and what kinds of
benefits can a particular society get from it?
Uh, IT is really, think of it as being
since World War II. Mhm. Um, THAT'S basically correct.
That's the easiest way to time it. Um, IT
Uh, benefits society greatly because if you didn't have
any public insurance. People are often will not be
able to afford as much uh private insurance for
their health. Um, And No country has ever, now
at this point I retreat to say, well, it
must be, there must be something in this argument
because this is the way we do it. Uh,
NO country has ever continued since World War II
to have all health be private and waiting for
church charities and things like that. Nobody's ever done
it. So why have they not done it? Um,
BECAUSE they sense that there are strong. Collective externalities.
About the public health. Uh, FOR example, if I
think that you are just somebody who lives in
a bad part of town because you're a kind
of a lazy person and you're, you're the wrong
kind of person, I should pay for your improved
sanitation and your health checkups. Because you can spread
disease and in um many countries like say the
United States, here's a a a common symptom of
what's wrong with not having the full insurance. People
are uninsured and they get into a desperate condition.
They are, uh, they have to go to the
emergency room. OK, they go to the emergency room,
they don't have the money. The rest of society
pays more than it would have otherwise, if it
had paid, invested more in preventive health care. Through
government, like local clinics, uh, emmerencias uh in Spain
which have served my wife uh in time of
need and things like that. Um, IF you didn't
have those, then the cost goes up because by
the time they reach the hos hospital's emergency room,
it's really costly to the rest of society. So
it's not just that your health is your concern,
your health is my concern too.
So, one more then, when it comes to welfare
provision, what kinds of social spending does it include
and over time, has it, has it gone up,
at least in the more developed countries or not?
Over time, it is. It went up earlier, though,
as I said, as a share of all social
spending, it's down because other things goes faster. OK.
Uh, Let's see, uh, other, uh, kinds of effects
it has. The arguments are the usual, uh, one,
you know, a conservative will say, oh, we don't
give them the extra welfare spending cause they'll just
spend it on, uh, something bad and not merits.
I can remember even way back in 50 years
ago or more, uh, when I was in India,
they said, oh, don't give people who are begging
money because they'll just spend it on movies. OK.
Apparently that was a social evil. Um, SO that's
a, that's a common argument, but against that is
the more progressive argument that, no, they get a
chance if they can feed themselves, like if they
can just kind of keep a household together, then
they can in fact uh go out and find
work more easily. That's a common argument in favor
of the welfare, uh. Yeah, that that one has
always gone back and forth, and you'll notice that
any critic of social spending. Is always trying to
tell you bad stories about welfare. Welfare is usually
the main target, basically because it goes to people
that are so different from me. Yes, the, the
person will be thinking, right? It's them.
Uh, BUT let me just ask you, when it
comes to some of those arguments in favor or
against welfare. What does the evidence tell us when
it comes to how people spend money they get
from welfare? Uh, I mean, do they really tend
to spend that much in things like, for example,
entertainment or even things that are considered bad like,
I don't know, alcohol, tobacco, drugs, or things like
that.
Um, THEY spend it the way other poor people
would who who who got their income. Without welfare,
uh, if you get your income by being a
barista uh in Starbucks, or you get your income
from welfare, it's gonna be the same expenditure pattern
if it's the same amount of money, um. So
that I think is the basic answer. There's not
much difference I see something else is going to
add, but uh um about how you say about
how they spend, oh yes, gender. Um, INTERESTING, uh,
this is, you know, the World Bank and others
who work on development and poverty all over the
world. They found a very interesting pattern about how
you give welfare. Let's think of the Mexican and
Brazilian famous conditional cash transfers to the poor. You
give cash transfers to people who are poor. Under
the condition that their children are actually going to
school and getting health checkups, but you, to whom
do you give the cash transfer? Always to mama.
Very interesting. Um, THERE'S a lot of evidence that
the targeted spending will be more related to the
child if mama gets the check. Then if a
papa gets it. Um, AND since you are interested
in the children in these programs in the first
place, that's sort of a universal lesson. So if
you want to ask how do people spend it,
interesting result that it depends on who, uh, is
it mama or papa who gets it.
That's very interesting. So earlier when I asked you
about how old is social spending and then we
also talked about Northwest Europe and the you have
the United States, and we, of course, could have
a few other countries across the world. Uh, WHEN
it comes to the developing countries, have they been
following a different path when it comes to government,
social spending or?
That it depends on which continents, but basically, um,
what I find, what I show is that If
you just say, are they following a different path
from what we followed earlier when we were, let's
say the same income that they have now. And
I've looked at that as best the the numbers
can tell us. Now, Interestingly, for most of the
world. At any given level of real GDP. There's
difficulty in measuring it, but at any level of
real GDP, 19th century, same same GDP now, the
developing countries now are spending more on social spending,
a greater share of that GDP on social spending
than we, Sweden, the United States or Japan did
way back then. That's the general pattern. The exception
is where they're definitely still spending less. Then we
had, uh, would be certain East Asian countries, uh,
Korea. China Singapore, uh, a few of those are
definitely spent, I said, uh, are definitely spending less
at the same level of income than we did,
but that's those are exceptions. Most, most of the
rest of the developing world is spending more on
social spending than we did.
And are there important differences in social spending depending
on the kind of political regime, like, for example,
between autocracies and democracy?
Yes, um, I can think of two patterns that
came out pretty clearly. Setting aside the communists for
a moment, uh, communist regimes. Then autocracy, uh, spend
less, uh, for the poor than democracies. Uh, THAT
has been a general pattern, uh, I'm sorry, for
the poor and for social spending in general, and
including education. There's a debate about that, but. That's
my conclusion. And Good example. Well, Spain and Portugal
since 1975. Um, THEY have raised all kinds of
social spending, including visible, very visibly education, uh, since
1975, faster than the other, uh, OECD or advanced
countries, uh, because they came out of those, they
came out of Franco and Salazar, etc. So that's
one good example right there. Now, the communist countries
are interesting. Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Say now
Russia and Eastern Europe. They do spend, they are
very European. They are high spenders on social spending,
uh, like, like the rest of Europe much. Some
of them are a little more conservative, like Estonia
is a little to the conservative side, things like
that, um, but in general, they spend very much
like other Europeans. Communist countries of Asia and Central
Asia, no. They, um they definitely spend less on
this, and it, it can be a surprise to
people who read the words about Chairman Mao's regime,
for example, all the iron rice bowl and making
sure everybody has plenty of everything. China never spent
like that, uh, and to this day they don't.
They spend less on social spending than the average,
uh, prosperous capitalist country uh of non-communist. So, there
is an interesting difference there. Uh, SO, do autocracy
spend less? Yes, uh, they spend less on social
spending except for uh communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
Mhm. So, now I would like to ask you
about when it comes to equalizing incomes, I mean,
for uh uh I think that it, it started
mostly after World War 2, or at least it
got stronger after that. There was a Strong tide
of governments around the world toward equalizing incomes. But
since the 1980s, has that tide been reversed in
any way with the rise of what some people
would call neoliberalism.
Uh, HAD the tide toward redistributing from rich to
poor, uh. No, not been reversed, not been reversed.
It has stopped advancing uh in many countries. So
it's been like a a plateau, but the There
is no general decline in how much I redistributed
from richer toward poorer since 1980. No general decline.
Let's see. So think of it as we got
more progressive up to 1980 and the wealthy OECD
countries have Stayed a progressive like that ever since.
That would be my best summary. I have, I
have numbers in the book about it, but that's
the best summary. Mhm.
And when it comes to economic inequality and perhaps
even more specifically intergenerational inequality, has it gotten, has
it become worse over time or not?
Um, So if you meant inequality, then my I
my previous answer would apply again. If you mean
um immobility, that uh that's to say uh the
social classes get locked between the generations. Um, MY,
my work is not about that. Uh, MEASURING inequality
was kind of difficult. Measuring intergeneration mobility is more
difficult. Uh, BUT now with the large data sets,
uh, and sophisticated statistical techniques, people have been doing
it. People like Raj Chetty and his, uh, co-authors
operating out of Harvard, etc. um. There are, let's
see, uh, and my, my colleague Gregory Clark, there
are Still, there's still a lot of debate about
that. Certainly if you thought that. With the rise
of social spending and the welfare state. Every mobility
should have improved, that is to say, say, sons
to think of males whose occupations are easily measured.
Uh, SONS nowadays is it true that they are
much more fluid, they can become anything uh more
than their unaffected by their fathers. No, there's not,
there's not a clear rise in improvement in mobility.
But that is the literature of other people. I
cannot claim that my book is uh resolving that.
So, another topic I would like to ask you
about because it is very relevant to our current
political context, particularly in Europe and also the United
States, because with the rise of recent far right
move. Movements. This is something that they always touch
on in their sort of political discourse. When it
comes to immigration specifically, does it have any negative
impact on the economy?
Uh, AS a, as an overall global result, no,
but uh uh yes, there's a danger, uh, here's
what it would depend on. Are the, why are
these people coming to your country? If it's simply
because. Um, THE situation in their own home country
is a disaster. They are just refugees. They have
to flee. Think Syria in 2015, for example. Think
most African countries today. Uh, NOW, that can be
a problem for the receiving country. And the way
you asked your question really was, what are the
effects on us, then already natives of the receiving
countries? That's the the sort of the narrow context
in which people usually ask, is it good? Yes.
And yes, there's a danger there, um, and I
would say this hasn't been the problem so much
in the past, but it's uh the threat is
there now. Today we live in a world where
The people who are living under bad governments. In
poor countries, They know it They have some money,
because they aren't as poor as poor in the
past. And they have cell phones. Uh, YOU know,
Africa just jumped into cell phones. They, they never
went through that earlier phase of building telephone lines
and landlines. It never happened. Africa is also, you
know, all the, all the women in the marketplace,
they know the latest price some other, you know.
So, but they know about the opportunities and that's
one problem, and and they can get here much
more easily now. So that is a danger that
they can just overwhelm the system, and if they're
coming for reasons that Uh, are like that. They
may be informed, but they don't speak our language,
and they could be a cost. So if in
large numbers, in large magnitudes, it could be a
problem. So far, our countries have been able to
handle this pretty well. If you think of the
basic issue of what a sort of steady moderate
inflow of immigrants worsen the economy. Well, even on
the terms that you and most people ask about,
which is what's the effect on the rest of
us in the rich countries. Uh, NO, uh, they
do not, for example, cause a drain on Um,
government, uh, budgets. They do when they first arrive
because their children are qualify for schools and then
they qualify for some basic health care. But very
soon, the fact that these people work and they
do work, they don't uh they don't come just
to rest on things, except in those mass refugee
very most alien cases. Then the fact they work
means that they are generating more in taxes than
the children are taking, and as you simply go
over an entire generation or longer, it's overwhelmingly clear
that anybody who is an immigrant, it becomes a
net payer of taxes, not a net recipient, uh
that that population as a whole. So, overall, they're
not a fiscal burden, they're not an economic burden,
even in the receiving country. And another good thing
that we don't mention much about the immigration is
the migrants themselves are getting enormous gains. They're. Human
beings, if you want to count them, then that
helps them. The countries they leave, uh, now there,
there is a cost. See, cause they suffer brain
drain and things like that. Very little do people
talk about it. We're actually very just focused on
ourselves these days.
So, uh, about another kind of thing that people
who are not, uh, big proponents, I mean, they
don't tend to like uh social spending too much.
One of the things that they very often bring
to the table has to do with social. Security
and the fact that because our life spans across
almost the entire globe are moving upwards that in
the, at least in the long term social security
would become unsustainable. Is that true?
It's um so uh I, I agree with the
need to worry about the aging of the population
and its implications for Pension budgets. Public, but not
just public. I could explain about that. As a
country gets older, as the population gets older, and
people are Tempted to spend a greater share of
their adult life and retirement, something has to give.
So, Um, As that the elderly or let's say
retired. Uh, POPULATION keeps rising as a share of
the total. It cannot be true. That what they
get in their old age rises as fast as
what a person, the average person earns when working.
That can't be true because the number of years
is changing, or I'm sorry, what they get in
old age per year, uh, in the book I
make this very clear. Let's uh cause most people
if you're thinking about social Security payments, you're thinking
about how much of them they get per year,
not over their lifetime, because their lifetime is expanding,
but per year, no, the amount, the generosity of
your aid to the average elderly or retired person
cannot rise as fast as the wage. That's a
problem because in many countries the law ties their
pension, annual pension to the wage. That's dangerous because
there's more of them and there's fewer of the
workers. Uh, THERE'S there's just a mathematical problem here.
So that if you can call it conservative you
wish, but that concern about uh the rise of
the pensions is great. Now, does it mean that
uh you say unsustainable? Yeah, um. I would choose
slightly different words cause unsustainable means, oh, the system's
gonna go bankrupt and collapse, the pension system. That's
not true. No political process would ever allow that
to happen, that the whole thing just collapses and
we you just flat out run out of money.
It wouldn't happen. They would raise the money through
government somehow. Uh, BUT the danger is still, uh,
clear, and it's a slow, slow acting danger. The
more and the share of GDP that you spend
on Uh, the elderly, uh, support for the elderly.
The less you can spend on other things, or
the less you can leave in private hands for
other things. Now, the rate of return that society
is getting from its help to the elderly is
clearly lower than the rate of return that you
get on investing more in children. So there is
a cost to growth in the long run. It's
gonna be slow acting though using calling unsustainable, it's,
it's not gonna result in bankruptcy, the immediate collapse
of the system. Uh, BUT there is a definite
danger and the main danger to. You could say
to social spending or it's the main danger to
rich uh to countries the world over from the
aging of the population, is that you're just gonna
be taking money away from more productive things. So
really simple as that, uh, and, and I, I,
I work on that a lot. Most countries have,
OK, OK, I'll pause here. Most countries have not
done the job quite so well yet.
Uh, BUT I, I would like to ask you
also because this is something that people, working people
worry a bit about, would that entail also necessarily
raising the age of retirement or cutting pensions in
any way?
Uh, YES, the last part of your question made
it very general, so the answer is yes in
general. Uh, SOMETHING has to has to give, you
know, suppose there were even it's so simple, suppose
you, there were no pensions, there's no system. You
just have to save for your own old age.
The more it's true over the generations that you
know you're gonna live longer than your grandfather lived.
Mhm. The less you can spend every single year,
all the way including all that retirement. uh RELATIVE
to your pay because it just, it won't go
with that much further. So that's just a uh
a basic fact. uh, THE Generosity of what you
get each year in old age in retirement, say.
Has to Rise more slowly. It cannot keep up
with the wage rate. That's, that's uh just uh
again a basic point that I keep harping on.
So that in general, yes. Now, specifically you said,
uh, should we have people work older? Um, I,
there's a good argument for that. After all, if
your adult life is gonna be longer, why shouldn't
the share of your adult life spent at work
stay the same? That's OK. That you would mandate
this, uh, that gets a little tricky because people's
individual conditions are so different. But one way or
the other, you've got to make it clear. If
they don't work to a later age. Then the
generosity of the pension has to slow down. It
cannot keep up with general pay.
But could that be mitigated in any way by
rising productivity levels or not?
Yes, absolutely. Oh, I would love, wouldn't that be
wonderful? Suppose we have no problem about the people
getting older because, oh, we just suddenly become more
productive and uh our productivity goes up 5% a
year, no problem. Uh, DEBATE over, let's just. Relax
and enjoy the extra prosperity.
Uh, SO we were talking about, uh, if rising
productivity levels could mitigate at least to some extent
the issues associated with the pension system.
Yes, the, the, it clearly could.
Uh, SO, uh, let, let me then ask you,
we're getting to the end of our conversation. Let
me just ask you a couple more questions. So,
Uh, could you give us specific examples of, uh,
government spending or making social spending in ways that
are, that you would consider wrong?
Mhm. Sure. That's pretty easy to do because it
exists in the real world, um. So, let's think
of. Um, PENSIONS in Brazil, locked in by the
by the uh constitution of 1983 88, and The
pensions, the constitution of Brazil, when they became a
democracy. Mhm. MADE it illegal to cut pensions very
much. And Oh boy, there's been much literature about
what is wrong with this. First of all, the
pension system is only for the very rich, the
top government officials, the military, the judges in the
court system, etc. AND they get outrageous, uh, uh,
generosity of these uh benefits. This was pointed out
as much as 30 years ago by the Wall
Street Journal and others, uh, and the Brazilians are
well familiar with this. In fact, the only partial
reform of that bad, uh, redistribution, not only toward
somebody it just as a pension, uh, that they
can enjoy on vacation, but to somebody who was
rich beforehand. Uh, THAT It was so obvious to
Brazilians that they were able to get the Part
of that constitutional protection for the rich, overthrown under
Bolsonaro. Interestingly, uh, Bolsonaro with all of his horrible
um uh effects on policy, when he first came
in, he and his fellow conservatives did a a
correct job of minimizing those uh very bad. So
this is something very familiar to the Brazilians. It
will be very familiar to other countries in the
near future. For example, Turkey has got the same
kind of thing, uh, incredible pensions to buy off
anybody influential that could be an opponent to the
government, you know, and uh stay tuned. They will
become like Brazil.
So, my last question then is, uh, between now
and mid-century, there is around 2050. What are some
of the biggest threats to social problems?
The biggest, uh, there are two main candidates that
I have thought about and write about. One is,
uh, immigration, the other is the aging of the
population. The second one is the real threat. That's
the big one. THE immigration, uh, coming in, would
it make people Undermines their support for social spending,
that's people have raised that possibility. That doesn't seem
true so far, uh, because You know, even the
Swedish conservatives or the Danish Conservatives say, well, wait
a minute now, uh, we'd like to keep some
of the social spending away from immigrants, uh especially
really alien Muslim types, but, uh, we can't get
rid of the whole program because that's ours. Uh,
WE'VE always lived under this program, we love it.
So then they, then you try to think of
ways, well, could we just deny the support only
to the immigrants. That's something. That has been tried
in some cases, it's, it's very difficult, um, just
to bifurcate uh the level of support. Oh, did
you, were you born in a foreign country? Nope,
sorry, you, you're, you're not entitled to education, things
like that. That's a hard thing for any political
system to support. It has been tried. The main
international migration example would be the in the state
of California back in the 1990s, the conservatives were
in power and they were able to get voted
through a proposition 180, I'm trying to remember the
number of it now, but uh a proposition whereby
if you are not a native born citizen, you
don't have the right to public programs as much.
And so they they got it, they won with
a majority of the vote. But Hispanics and others
were so offended. By this uh behavior, then it
really killed the Republican Party in California. And to
this day, the Republicans just have no particular hope
in California, whereas they're really strong in Florida or
Texas, uh, places like that. Um, SO you can
try to discriminate against the foreigners in your social
spending. In practice, it doesn't work out very well.
So you've got that basic choice. Either don't let
people in. Or Yeah, try to let everybody in
and deal with it, but basically what most countries
are gravitating toward will preserve the social spending, that
was what you're asking about. It will preserve the
social spending generosity. Um, BUT we will increasingly do
what Canada and Australia and other countries have done
all along, which is have skill requirements and productivity
requirements for immigrants. Uh, AND basically, if people are
truly destitute and refugees from bad governments, too bad
for them is where the political system is going.
We want the skilled immigrants, thank you. The others,
no. That's really what the the systems are saying,
right?
Yeah, so, uh, just to be clear then between
now and mid-century, the biggest A threat, or I
mean, the main area where social spending would uh
be probably cut down a little bit is in
terms of supporting immigration or unskilled immigration.
UNSKILLED immigration on the immigration front, but your original
question, I'm sorry that I got into two things
at once, but it was, uh, your original question
was broader, and yes, the main threat is from
the aging of the population. You have to deal
with that. That's the big threat. The immigration is
less of a threat. It will probably be dealt
with by favoring the skilled immigrants.
Right, so the book is again making social spending
work. I will leave a link to it in
the description of the interview, uh. Oh, there it
is. Great. So, Doctor Linder, just before we go,
are there any places on the internet that where
people can find you and your work?
Uh, SURE, you just Google my name, um, and
my work is there, and I even have little
things on my website that are additions to um.
Uh, FACTS since, uh, the book was published, uh,
and Come just Google my name. That's the easiest
thing to do.
Right. So, Doctor Linder, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a fascinating conversation, so thank you so
much. I've
enjoyed it. Thank you so much, Ricardo, for arranging
this.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.